# 17.2 Lesson Plan - Content Is King

### Overview

Today's lesson will introduce students to the concepts of content marketing.

#### Instructor Priorities

* Students should be able to explain the intersection of content marketing and SEO. 

* Students should be able to enumerate the WCAG guidelines for accessibility. Namely, that content should be:

  * Perceivable;

  * Operable;

  * Understandable; and

  * Robust.

* Students should be able to 

* The goal is just for students to understand why content marketing matters, and familiarize them with 

#### Instructor Notes

* It's important for students to understand the importance of content marketing for SEO, but projects take priority. This lesson's exercises are **optional**.

* Have your TAs refer to the [TimeTracer](17.2-TimeTracker.xlsx) to stay on track.

- - -

### Class Objectives

* Students should be able to articulate the importance of content marketing;

* Students should understand accessibility, and be able to write accessible markup;

* Students should be able to articulate the relationship between UX, content, and conversion.

- - -

### 1. Instructor Do: Content Marketing Overview (0:15)

* Remind students that SEO involves both site structure and markup, and the content on the site.

* Explain that a site with perfect technical optimization but spam content will not rank well.

* Remind students that technical SEO and quality content are both required for strong SEO.

  * "If you are trying to grow your qualified search traffic, you have to combine your content marketing with your SEO efforts. Running them as separate campaigns isn’t going to provide you with as big of a traffic increase as combining them into one campaign will." ~ [Kissmetrics](https://www.quicksprout.com/2014/01/20/7-smart-ways-to-combine-content-marketing-with-seo-for-more-qualified-search-traffic/)

* It's cliché, but it's true that **content is king**.

* Content marketing is a broad subject. We'll cover a few ways in which it intersects with SEO, and direct interested students to relevant resources.

* Emphasize the relationship between content marketing and technical SEO:

  * The goal of technical SEO should be to bring your unique and valuable **content** to your target audience.

  * Your unique and valuable content _must_ be technically optimized to be visible to your target audience.

  * We'll explore the intersection of SEO and content marketing in these terms.

* Discuss the following points.

  * **Technical SEO Requires Keyword Optimization**. Keyword optimization requires content.

    * Put another way: Content marketing is how you _implement_ the insights of your keyword research!

    * Remind students of our discussion of head terms and long-tail keywords.

    * Explain that deftly executing a content marketing campaign requires content to be planned around the keywords.

      * Your keywords dictate your editorial calendar. You don't "plug" keywords into articles scheduled before keyword research.

      * This ensures that content reads naturally, and is valuable by virtue of being written _specifically_ for those searching for precisely what the article is about.

  * **Content Marketing Demands UX**. Users will not engage with good content on a site with terrible UX. So, UX is an indirect, but crucial, component of any sensible SEO strategy.

    * Conventional SEO dictates a number of technical modifications to a page—title tags, headers, sitemaps, breadcrumbs, etc. 

    * These elements aren't immediately relevant to your content, but they improve the UX of your site.

  * **SEO Benefits From Consistent Site Updates**. [Google boosts rankings for newer content](https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/11/giving-you-fresher-more-recent-search.html). Other search engines probably behave similarly.

    * Content markets use an editorial calendar to plan what content they'll publish, when.

    * Such calendars define what will be published well ahead of time.

      * Many websites plan six to 12 months ahead.

      * Planning at least quarterly is a best practice.

    * This consistency has direct benefits where conventional SEO is concerned—fresh content means better rankings.

  * **SEO Requires Backlinks. Content produces them**. Quality content links out to authority sources, and encourages others to link back.

    * The number of high-quality websites that link to your page has a _strong_ influence on your search rankings.

    * Producing high-quality content encourages others to provide backlinks—links from other sites to yours.

    * This, in turn, improves your search rankings.

  * A related overlap tactic is guest posting, or submitting articles to related sites. This gets your name out, and allows you to link to your site from your partner's—this satisfies both endeavors.

  * **Search Is a Popularity Contest. Content is Popular**. Site popularity is a ranking factor. 

    * Good content drives traffic, and traffic improves search engine perception of your site's popularity.

### 2. Everyone Do: Discuss Content Marketing (Optional) (0:10)

* As content marketing is a long-term game, it's difficult to develop meaningful, didactic exercises.

* Instead, slack out [these of case studies from CopyBlogger](http://www.copyblogger.com/?s=case+study), and encourage students to peruse them.

* Feel free to select and discuss one as a class, if time allows. Otherwise, move on to accessibility.

### 3. Instructor Do: Accessibility Overview (0:15)

* Reiterate that content requires technical SEO, because users only read content they can actually find.

  * Rephrase this: In other words, users only read content they can _access_.

* Explain that accessibility is deeper than SEO.

* Point out that the visually impaired, for example, cannot, and do not, experience the web the way people who see "normally" do. The same is true for those with other sensory impediments.

* Point out that roughly 20% of people who use the web have some disability that impedes their ability to interact with websites. **Accessibility cannot be an afterthought**.

* Just as there is a [standards body for JavaScript](http://www.ecma-international.org/memento/TC39.htm), the [W3C](https://www.w3.org/) standards organization has developed standards for accessibility.

  * These are called the [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/), or WCAG. You may slack these out to students, but they likely won't get much mileage out of it.

* Explain that accessibility focuses on easing barriers due to four major disability types:

  * **Visual**. E.g., color blindness, blindness

  * **Hearing**. E.g., deafness

  * **Motor**. Difficulty typing/using a mouse/etc.

  * **Cognitive**. Learning/attention disabilities

* As an example, explain that the visually impaired browse much differently than "normal" people.

  * The severely impaired use [screen readers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader),

    * Explain that screen readers present a document based on its hierarchical and navigational structure.

      * E.g., they might identify navigation, and read that first; then headings, in hierarchical order.

      * A listener can then select to navigate away, or listen to the content under a given heading.

      * This is one of the UX justifications for solid heading structure!

    * Explain that screen readers also make use of `alt` text. 

      * Images add a lot of meaning to a page. But, without annotation, they're meaningless to those who can't see them. 

      * Screen readers get around this by reading image `alt` text, so the listener can understand the content of the image, even if to an attenuated degree.

      * Point out the overlap between `alt` text's utility for SEO and accessibility.

  * The slightly less impaired often browse with a zoom level above 250%.

    * Sites that implement breakpoints often switch to mobile layout for such high zoom levels. 

    * Failing to provide a responsive layout hinders people who have to browse this way.

* Explain that accessibility is about ensuring your site can accomodate the needs of anyone who uses it, whether those needs are "normal" or unique.

* According to the WCAG, implementing accessibility means ensuring your content is **perceivable**; **operable**; **understandable**; and **robust**.

  * Walk throuh each of these four terms, and cover at least one of the guidelines for each. Feel free to move quickly—remind students that this is all quoted from the spec.

  * **Perceivable**. "Information and user interface components must be presentable to users in ways they can perceive." I.e., _any_ user should be aware of _all_ of your content.

    * "Provide text alternatives for non-text content". E.g., `alt` text for images.

    * "Create content that can be presented in different ways". E.g., implement a responsive layout to ensure users can browse your site in whatever coniguration necessary, and enjoy full access to your content.

    * "Make it easier for users to see and hear content including separating foreground from background." In particular, make sure your fonts are sized well, and readable against the background.

      * A base font size of 18px is considered a best practice by many.

  * **Operable**. "User interface components and navigation must be operable." I.e., _any_ use rshould be able to interact with _any_ interative UI component.

    * "Make all functionality available from a keyboard." 

    * "Provide users enough time to read and use content." I.e., make sure that users can override any temporal factors of your content—that they can pause videos and slideshows, control refresh reates of auto-updating content, etc.

    * "Do not design content in a way that is known to cause seizures." Notably, avoid flashing lights.


* **Understandable**. "Information and the operation of user interface must be understandable."

  * "Make text content readable and understandable."

  * "Make Web pages appear and operate in predictable ways."

  * "Help users avoid and correct mistakes."

    * Discuss how this relates to optimized forms—validation error messages, etc.

* **Robust**. "Content must be robust enough that it can be interpreted reliably by a wide variety of user agents, including assistive technologies."

  * "Maximize compatibility with current and future user agents, including assistive technologies."

    * Briefly touch on [graceful degradation](https://www.w3.org/wiki/Graceful_degradation_versus_progressive_enhancement) and progressive enhancement.


* Remind students that they don't need to memorize these guidelines. Rather, they should bookmark the standards for reference.

  * It's worth mentioning that CSS frameworks generally try to address accessibility for you.

- - -

### 4. BREAK (0:10)

- - -

### 5. Partners Do: Make Accessibility Updates to Project (Optional) (0:30)

* The purpose of this "activity" is to turn students' attention back to their projects while accessibility is fresh on their minds.

* Tell students that they're free to get to work on their projects—but, that they should spend some time trying to improve at least one aspect of accessibility.

  * Emphasize that they should _try_. Since today's introduction was conceptual, it's alright if they can't confidently implement accessibility optimizations _today_.

* Slack out the following resources:

  * [EggHead on Accessibility](https://egghead.io/courses/start-building-accessible-web-applications-today).

  * [Clarissa Patterson on Accessible HTML5](http://www.clarissapeterson.com/2012/11/html5-accessibility/).

  * [Shay Howe on Accessible and Semantic Markup](http://learn.shayhowe.com/advanced-html-css/semantics-accessibility/).

* Explain that students are free either to use these resources for inspiration, or simply spend the activity time reading them/discussing with partners.

  * Either way, encourage them to bookmark these links ,and refer to them when implementing markup.

### 6. Everyone Do. Review Activity (0:10)

* Call on a couple of groups to explain the ways they improved their sites accessibility.

* If time and student interest allows, try to foster a discussion. Ask things like:

  * How does this make your site more operable? Perceivable? Etc.

    * Feel free to use more natural language than that of the spec. 

  * If a group makes an optimization catering to the 

* Otherwise, dismiss students to their projects.

- - -

### Copyright

Coding Boot Camp © 2016. All Rights Reserved.
